# About
Date: 2021-12-31
Tags: 
Type: page

**Welcome to logangraves.com!** I'm Logan*, an American high school student, and this is my website/blog/coding playground/online identity hub. Here you'll see most of my public writing, both code and words; I wrote this site's back and front-ends from scratch using Python and the HTML/CSS/JS suite, so I've had a lot of fun with the site and its features... and its secrets ;). I'll explain more in a blog post on the subject, but to make a long story short, it's a learning project for me. Because of its experimental nature (primarily the fact that I wrote it to generate dynamically and have a search function), it's very likely that there are vulnerabilities. If you find one, or if you just want to check out the source, it's on [my Github](https://github.com/lgngrvs/logangraves.com). 

\*I've gone by various names in the past; for example, some important people in my life know me as Tadhg, but to most people at home (as well as on my birth certificate) I go by Logan. Call me whatever feels comfortable to you, though -- nicknames or just totally different names are fine! :)

## Interests and Topics of Conversation
Since one of my primary goals of having a website is to have a way to start conversations with interesting people, I figured I might include a section on things I'm interested in talking about. If you see something you like, feel free to [contact me](/identities). In fact, please do!

**AI, Math, Philosophy, and Psychology.** I'm a generalist of the extreme variety. My strongest interest lies in the intersection of philosophy, math, and CS (and to an interesting extent psychology) -- namely, AI (see also the *(Computational) Linguistics* section)-- but especially in the philosophy aspect, partly because I don't yet have the advanced mathematical knowledge required to partake in the other two much. I think a lot about questions of ethics and epistemology, which you'll likely see a lot of on this blog; this is because logaically I can't justify any view other than moral anti-realism (i.e. there is no objectively true morality -- [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anti-realism) cause it's a bit of an esoteric term but note that I don't necessarily follow any exact views mentioned), but yet I *feel* a very strong sense of right and wrong -- and nearly always defer to the latter. My views continue to evolve, though, so it's not unlikely that I'll change my mind on this. I like to try and explore the parts of the mind that aren't rational and objective, and how they interact with my consciousness. [Limerance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limerence) (broadly, the feeling of love) in particular is an object of my fascination. Theology and Comparative Religion are also interesting to me because I feel like I experience a lot of religious impulses in spite of being (once again, the only position I can seem to justify logically) a secular agnostic -- and because there's a lot of wisdom in religion, whether or not there is Truth with a capital T. 

I 'like' (i.e. am stimulated by and follow the ideas of) existentialism (not that it makes me happy because that's questionable); right now I'm reading Kierkegaard's *Fear and Trembling*, Sartre's *Existentialism is a Humanism* (because I don't have the time or heart to read his actual books), Descartes' *Discourse on the Method*, and Leo Strauss' *Natural Right and History*. (One might be surprised to find a Strauss book with Kierkegaard and Sartre, but *Natural Right and History* deals with, well, 'natural right', and whether humans can discover truth separate from their historical context, so it fits in pretty well actually. He does look at it through the lens of a political philosopher, though, in contrast to the aforementioned two.)

**(Computational) Linguistics.** Another interesting avenue of exploration into AI for me is computational linguistics: language intrigues me because of how it shapes our communication and mental functioning. (One very interesting related thing here is the [Sapir-Whorf hypothesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linguistic_relativity)). I highly recommend *The Alignment Problem* by Brian Christian; it's a long read but it's a really, really interesting layman's introduction to AI, and it's what got me interested in computational linguistics. I enjoy [conlangs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constructed_language), though I haven't come up with any. I'm a native speaker of American English and have proficiency in Spanish and [Toki Pona](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toki_Pona). *(sina toki e toki pona la, mi wile e ni: sina open e toki poka mi, kepeken toki pona!)* I like German because of its compound nouns, French because of its fluidity and the way it deals with words' 'genders', and Japanese because of its phonology and sentence structure -- I'm working on learning those three, though not working particularly hard. 

**Policymaking and Politics.** I'm also intrigued by current events, international relations, and policymaking. I hate engaging with partisan U.S. politics but believe it is a *very* necessary evil. I'm a huge fan of public transportation, especially trains (in fact, my views on public transportation are objectively correct), but will leave the rest of my political views up to interpretation. I'm also interested in rationality (in the [LessWrong](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/bJ2haLkcGeLtTWaD5/welcome-to-lesswrong) sense) and effective altruism, which I try to have inform much of the above. 

**Computer Science and Web Design.** I have some useful knowledge of CS; I write in Python (I used the [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.2.0/)/Jinja2/Werkzeug suite after it was recommended to me by a friend) and am relatively proficient in HTML/CSS/JS. I know some very basic Bash just to navigate the terminal, though I intend to get more proficient. In the future I'm looking to go deeper into the basics of computers: I hope to learn some lower-level languages (including Assembly just for funzies haha), though I need a project to use them in first. To go back to the AI stuff, I want to learn about neural nets and machine learning, but am in need of linear algebra and multivariate (multivariable?) calculus so they're, again, definitely a few years off. I've thought about participating in a computing olympiad but I don't know anyone interested in doing one, and I think it would be too time-consuming to do prep and practice for. I'm a huge design fanatic, as you (hopefully) may be able to tell by looking at this site, and at the moment that primarily means web design. CSS is actually not something I hate working with -- hot take, I know. 

**Body, Mind, and Soul.** I believe that the rational mind, the body, and the "soul" (meaning spirituality or something along those lines) are equally-seated pillars of living. Much of my time is spent playing soccer and volleyball, as at the moment they're both year-round sports for me. I like to talk about professional soccer ('football', sorry), especially the EPL and Champions League. I'm interested in physical fitness and health -- diet, effective training, etc. -- as well as meditation and related activities. I enjoy traveling and being in nature, so I love hiking, snorkeling, and rafting among other things and would some day like to learn to sail. 

**Video Games.** I don't really play video games anymore except as a social activity. Not because I don't want to, I just... don't. I still like them, though. I loved Overwatch and Minecraft when I was in middle school, so I guess those remain my favorites. I still play Minecraft sometimes; I've run two Minecraft servers in the past few years, mainly during COVID peaks because it's a good way to get people together and hanging out when they can't do so physically. I have also played a nonzero amount of Eurotruck Simulator, weirdly enough. I love watching people play Elden Ring -- it's a masterpiece of a game and I am in love with it and Dark Souls aesthetics in general, but I don't have enough time to dedicate to getting good enough to beat it -- and I'd count that as one of my favorites were it not for the fact that I have never played it and do not own the game. While we're on the topic of Dark Souls games, [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xpf3KQBIoCY) is my favorite video on the internet at the moment. 

**Music.** I play the piano, guitar, and my vocal chords, the latter two much less seriously than the former. I do some music production in Ableton and Maschine, and I've been a keyboardist and sometimes singer "in" a few "bands" that never actually had any significant commitment. We'll see, though. Other music-related things I enjoy are songwriting, music theory, and making playlists. I like most genres of music -- I currently listen to a lot of indie, indie folk, rap, and some rock but I'll listen to nearly any genre as long as the music doesn't suck.

That's most of it, I think. Once again, if any of these things, or a post on my blog, or a project that I'm working on, interests you, please [contact me](/identities)!